Welcome to this video in which you are going to learn about four loops.
That is a very exciting topic to learn about for loops.
Not to be confused with Fruit Loops, or I think it's actually spelled Fruit Loops.
But anyway, what I'm going to do is just start typing and then I will explain what is going on in this
code.
Okay, so I typed some things and now I run this cell and we see the numbers zero through five being
printed out okay.
So this is the concept of a for loop.
We have the keyword for.
And then here another keyword in and then colon okay.
So the keyword four tells Python that we are about to initiate a for loop.
And then we have a looping variable over here.
This is a variable that changes its value at each iteration of the for loop.
Sometimes these are numerical values like this.
You see, these are numbers.
Sometimes they are elements of a list.
So they can be strings.
They can be lots of different types of iterating variables.
And then we have this reserved keyword in that always has to be there in a for loop when you're setting
up a for loop.
And then we have this item here is called the iterable.
So right now I have it set to be this function range which you have seen multiple times before.
But in general this needs to be any type of variable that can be considered an iterable.
And what is an iterable?
An iterable is a type of variable that can iterate.
And what does it mean to iterate?
It means to basically draw an element out of the the variable, like a list or a set, or a range,
or a matrix or an array one by one.
Okay.
And then once we're inside the for loop, then we can work with this iterable variable, this looping
index variable in this case and do whatever.
So in this case I'm just printing it out.
Now notice again this is similar to what you saw in a couple videos ago in the previous section about
spacing when defining functions.
So here the spacing is similar.
So now I can write print end of for loop like this.
Now this text here has two spaces.
Again it can be two spaces.
It can be four spaces.
As long as you are consistent about using either 2 or 4 spaces within a given control statement or function,
then it's fine.
I like two because I think it just looks nicer.
So all of this text is inside the for loop.
That means that all of this code gets run in this case six times, and then as soon as you get rid of
the spaces here, then the horizontal spaces, then that's the code that's outside the for loop.
So here we have the variable I on each iteration, it's changing its value.
And then we have the, you know, whatever code is after the for loop.
Okay.
So, uh, as you know from me explaining, uh, concepts about counting in Python, we start at zero.
And this is an exclusive upper bound.
So we actually end at the number five.
Okay.
So a little bit more about uh for loops.
Let's see I can go from 4 to 10.
And just to show you here that we can also work with these, uh, with this iterable as if it is a normal
variable.
It is a normal variable.
So I can not only print it out, I can also do mathematical operations on it like square it.
So here you see we get 416 525.
And what do these numbers mean.
Well it's printing out I which is the looping index that is going from four through nine.
So four inclusive nine exclusive.
And then I'm just squaring those numbers over here.
Pretty straightforward.
Let me now show you another example of a for loop.
First I'm going to create some numbers.
So let's say I want linearly spaced numbers between 3 and 17.
And how about let's make 21 of these.
Now what do you think is going to happen when I run this code?
You're probably already thinking that it might give an error because I asked the question.
So the answer is it is going to give an error.
And what I want you to do is make sure that you understand what this error message means and how we
can fix it.
Okay.
So what this error message means is that I'm trying to access the numpy library, but I have not yet
imported it.
See, this is a brand new fresh notebook file and I haven't yet imported numpy.
Now we can import numpy anywhere we want.
I can put it right here import numpy as np.
But and that's fine.
This will now not work.
But it is good practice.
It's good coding etiquette in Python.
To import all of the libraries that you will need at the top of the code file.
So I'm going to say I'm going to write a comment here.
Import necessary libraries.
Now right now we only need one library.
But in the future you will be importing matplotlib.
You'll be importing PyTorch, you'll be importing, you know, maybe SciPy.
There's all sorts of libraries that you are going to be importing when you actually start writing real
code.
So it's good to have all of the import calls at the top of the code file.
Okay, so anyway, now this works here.
And now what I want to do is loop over, not just loop over indices that I define here from range,
but loop over the numbers in here.
So here we have our vector of numbers 3 to 17.
And now what I want to do is loop over these numbers.
So there's a couple of ways we can do this, depending on what kinds of calculations you need to solve
inside the for loop.
So for starters I'm going to write.
Actually I'll write this ID this is short for index index id so for id in range.
And now how many elements do we want in this range.
If we want to access each of these numbers.
Well the answer is 21.
And how do I know it's 21.
Because I specified in this linspace function that I want 21 numbers.
But you know, maybe at some point later on I want to change this to 24.
So then it's not very convenient to have to change this as well.
So therefore I'm going to use a function Len for length and numbers.
So this is a concept encoding called soft coding.
So soft soft coding.
Soft coding is where you only specify the parameters numerically at the beginning of a code file or
the beginning of a cell, and thereafter, every time you need to access that information, you can
just write calls to variables that you have previously defined.
So now when I change this back to 21, I don't need to change anything in here that's going to automatically
dynamically reset back to 21 when I run the code again.
Okay.
So let's see what should we do here?
I'm going to extract a number.
Maybe I'll put in a comment here as well.
Extract one element of this array.
And here I'm going to use indexing.
So numbers ID.
So this is going to be the id element of numbers this vector.
And then I'm going to print out some information.
So let's see I'm going to print out iteration plus string I Plus has a value of plus string x.
Okay.
So let's see what we're doing here.
We are extracting up.
This is id x not I.
We are looping over all the elements in this numpy array, extracting some information and then printing
out a helpful message.
So at this particular iteration we have a value of whatever this number happens to be.
Okay.
This is a very similar formulation to what you will be using when you train models.
When you train deep learning models, you're going to want to print out information about how long into
the training you are, maybe the loss function, maybe some other information about the model performance,
or about some other aspect of the training set.
So this kind of formulation you're going to be using quite often.
Now it turns out that there is actually a better way to print out all this information which I have
mentioned before, only briefly.
I haven't yet introduced you to f strings, but we will get back to that later in the Python tutorial.
What I'd like to do now is show you one more example of a for loop, and this will be combining a for
loop with a function.
And the idea of this for loop inside a function is going to be to calculate the Fibonacci Fibonacci
series okay.
So the idea of a Fibonacci series.
I'm sure you've heard of Fibonacci numbers.
The idea of Fibonacci series is that you have.
You start off with the vectors with the numbers zero, one, and then each number after that is the
sum of the previous two numbers.
So the value of this number is zero plus one.
This number over here becomes the sum of the previous two numbers.
So that becomes two.
And what is what do we put for this element here?
Well, it's the sum of the previous two numbers.
So that's one plus two equals three.
And then the next one is five and the next one is eight.
And so on.
These numbers grow really large really fast okay.
So what we want to do is create an array that is going to keep growing.
And each element in the array is defined as the sum of the previous two elements in this array.
So if you would like to pause the video and see if you can program the Fibonacci series on your own,
then that's great.
I encourage you to do that.
Otherwise I'm going to do it now and you can follow along with me.
Okay.
So we need to initialize.
Initialize a vector.
And I'm going to call this v.
And now actually this is more like mathematically this is a vector.
But in terms of Python data types it's actually a list.
But we're thinking about it in terms of a vector because it contains an ordered sequence of numbers.
Okay.
So now what we want is a for loop.
So for I in range.
And let's start with for.
I'm going to replace this with a variable.
But for now let's just say for.
This means I'm going to update this four times.
Okay.
So what do we need to do.
We need to calculate the sum of v from the end minus two up until the current position.
So that's going to give me this.
So let me just print this out here.
Okay.
So what we get is just a bunch of ones.
And why are we getting ones.
Well you know this calculation is correct.
But the next thing we need to do is make this list grow by the sum.
So this list actually needs to adopt new elements each, uh, each time we go at each iteration through
this for loop.
Okay.
So to do that we can use a method on this list called append.
So I'm going to write like.
This.
Okay.
And then here I will check out v.
So v dot append.
This is a method.
And a method is like a function but it acts on a particular variable.
I'll talk more about methods later on in this tutorial when I introduce you to object oriented programming
and classes.
Okay, so for now, suffice it to say that there are certain types of variables that have particular
functions attached to them.
And yeah, and append on a list is one example.
Okay.
So here we have the beginning of a Fibonacci series.
Now I said that we are going to have a function and a for loop.
At the same time I have not actually created a function.
So what I'm going to do now is create a function.
I'll call this fib seek for Fibonacci sequence.
It's going to take one input, which is n, and that is going to be the variable in this range function
over here.
Okay.
And then we want to return v okay.
So let's see.
Now I can run this code cell to initialize this function.
And now I can call it so fib seek.
And first of all we can confirm that when we provide no inputs then we get an error message.
It's missing one required positional argument.
Again argument is like a fancy term for input n okay.
So the function crashed because it's expecting an input but it didn't get one.
So now I will write.
How about five.
Okay that's great.
How about nine.
Pretty interesting 15.
And you know these numbers get pretty big pretty quickly.
So here we are already at 121,000.